v4 Planning Document (#1457)
JasperFx/marten: planning/MartenV4.md

# Marten v4 Ideas

## Pulling it Off

We've got the typical problems of needing to address incoming pull requests and bug issues in master while probably needing to have a long lived branch for *v4*. 

Here are some thoughts:

> * First do a bug sweep 3.12 release to address as many of the tactical problems as we can before branching to v4?

Reviewer: Yes, I think that we should do a bug bash and close as many open issues and PR that we can.

> * Start with the unit testing improvements as a way to speed up the build before we dive into much more of this? 

Reviewer: @jeremydmiller could you elabortate on that part?

Author: I think that if we could get aggressive w/ xUnit ClassFixtures to share DocumentStore objects and schemas, we could speed up the testing feedback. Maybe even allow a little multithreading w/ different schemas too.

I'm worried a little bit about the cold start overhead on the testing by re-introducing the runtime codegen, but it would make all the development go faster in the longer run by speeding up the test times.

Especially now that we're doing so much matrix testing

Reviewer: Ok, understood, so that's mostly what's described below. I agree with that 👍

Author: I think this would be the very first thing I'd want to tackle. And maybe even immediately as a helper for v3.12 even.

> * Possibly do a series of v4, then v5 releases to do this in smaller chunks? We've mostly said do the event store as v4, then Linq improvements as v5

Reviewer: Sure we don't need to deliver everything at once, but in v4.0.0 we should squeeze all the breaking changes to reduce the confusion.

Author: I agree with this. I know we talked about doing v4 for events, then v5 for other things, but Id rather just do it in one larger release if there's going to be breaking changes.

> * Do the Event Store v4 work in a separate project built as an add on from the very beginning, but leave the existing event store in place. That would enable us to do a lot of work *and* mostly be able to keep that work in master so we don't have long-lived branch problems

Reviewer: That seems like an idea, but currently, it's hard for me to say if that would be the best option. It would depend on how revolutionary will be the changes. If they are the only revolution inside but not in the public API then probably we can even put it into the core part. We need to remember that keeping it separate code it's not much different than doing that on separate branch, as we will also need to align that with the ongoing changes (unless we're rewriting everything from scratch...). The other case is how to deal with the acceptance tests of the public api for old and new code?

Author: I think we end up with almost brand new syntax for defining and configuring projections. I don't think the public API for appending events or querying events would change too much. 

I do think the `IEvent` and whatever else we come with for streams will absolutely change. The underlying table structures are almost 100% certain to have additions

The acceptance tests are still usable, because that's mostly running events through and seeing expected states for the projected documents at the end.

Reviewer: We can play that by ear. But my main concern is that we won't end up with something that will be hard to integrate. With git, we at least have built-in conflicts resolution etc. I'd like to also minimize the number of breaking change in the API.

However this is a good point that our projections api is far from being ideal.

* Damn the torpedos and full speed ahead!

## Miscellaneous Ideas

> * Look at some kind of object pooling for the `DocumentSession` / `QuerySession` objects?

Reviewer: What do you mean by object pooling?

Author: There's might be some opportunity to reuse `DocumentSession` and especially `QuerySession` objects between usages so you don't have to keep allocating and throwing away those objects. You'd have to reset the state a bit. Not sure it's worthwhile, hence the "?"

Reviewer: That sounds like nice idea, but I also don't know how to implement that. Maybe we could put it as "nice to have"?

Author: "Nice to do" sounds fine to me

> * Ditch the document by document type schema configuration. Do that, and I think we open the door for multi-tenancy by schema

Reviewer: That also needs more clarifications for me.

Author: Today you can have Marten put document "A" in schema "A", then document "B" in schema "B" and so on. I want to get rid of that if possible as a way to do "multi-tenancy via schemas"

Reviewer: Understood. Would be nice to include that (and other clarifications from the comments into document).

> * Eliminate `ManagedConnection` altogether. I think it results in unnecessary object allocations and it's causing more harm that help as it's been extended over time

Reviewer: Do we plan to resign in general from the connection pool management?

Author: Connection pool management is Npgsql, not us. `ManagedConnection` is just a convenience to simplify ADO.Net mechanics for developers, but it's not super-efficient at runtime because of the extra object allocations with the Lambdas.

Reviewer: That's fine however it would be good to check how the EF is doing the connection pooling. Especially if we'd like to do cross schema or later cross database tenancy.

Author: I wouldn't expect that EF Core does its own connection pooling, or do you just mean how it deals with connection lifecycle?

Author: Do you just mean the connection lifecycle management? Because EF wouldn't be doing the actual connection pooling, that'd be deeper in the ADO.Net provider level

Reviewer: My bad. You're right. They're not doing connection pooling but the connection lifecycle management (so probably similar as we do).

Author: I added more comments. I don't think we can get away with eliminating `ManagedConnection` easily, but I want some changes to stop the inefficient Lambda usage.

> * Can we consider ditching < .Net Core or .Net v5 for v4? 

Reviewer: I'd vote for .NET v5. .NET versions are poping up right now faster than new JS frameworks 😉

Author: Dunno if that's feasible, but I'd *love* to drop anything on the full framework

Reviewer: We'd need to ask our users. I'd also love to do that (however, as for now we don't have a lot of hacks for older versions).

* Document metadata properties -- but sad trombone, that might have to stay with Expressions if the setters are internal/private :/
* Much more of the `ISelector` implementations, especially since there's going to be more variability when we do the document metadata
* Finer-grained manipulation of the `IIdentityMap` 

## Unit Testing Approach

If we introduce the runtime code generation back into Marten, that's unfortunately a non-trivial "cold start" testing issue. To soften that, I suggest we get a lot more aggressive with reusable [xUnit.Net class fixtures](https://xunit.net/docs/shared-context) between tests to reuse generated code between tests, cut way down on the sheer number of database calls by not having to frequently check the schema configuration, and other `DocumentStore` overhead. 

A couple other points about this:

* We need to create more unique document types so we're not having to use different configurations for the same document type. This would enable more reuse inside the testing runtime
* Be aggressive with separate schemas for different configurations
* We could possibly turn on xUnit.net parallel test running to speed up the test cycles

> 

Reviewer: I agree with the points. We should also design the unit tests to give us possibility to run them against different configurations (eg. DateTime vs NodatTime, Newtonsoft JSON.NET vs System.Text.JSON etc.)

Can we also consider doing our test objects more related to the real code samples (so eg. for the event store instead of MonsterSlayed then eg. OrderCreated)?

Author: Definitely that. I think I'd recommend pulling anything related to querying through Linq into its own testing project so you could do a matrix test on only those tests.

Author: And I've always been terrible about event sourcing samples, so yeah;)

Reviewer: @jeremydmiller I think that I know a repository with decent samples for event sourcing part ;)

## Document Metadata

* Use the configuration and tests from [pull request for Document Metadata](https://github.com/JasperFx/marten/pull/1364), but use the Lamar-backed dynamic code generation from the previous section to pull this off.

> * I think we could expand the document metadata to allow for user defined properties like "user id" or "transaction id" much the same way we'll do for the EventStore metadata. We'd need to think about how we extend the document tables and how metadata is attached to a document session

Reviewer: I agree. We should aim to provide both built-in metadata (potentially moving there also some of the already existing columns) and user-customizable. 
About the ES metadata - for me the most important metadata are corellation id and causation id.

## Project / Assembly Restructuring

* Pull everything to do with Schema object generation and difference detection to a separate library (`IFeatureSchema`, `ISchemaObject`, etc.). Mostly to clean out the main library, but also because this code could easily be reused outside of Marten. Separating it out might make it easier to test and extend that functionality, which is something that occasionally gets requested. There's also the possibility of further breaking that into abstractions and implementations for the long run of getting us ready for Sql Server or other database engine support

* *Possibly* pull the ADO.Net helper code like `CommandBuilder` and the extension methods into a small helper library somewhere else (I'm nominating the [Baseline](https://jasperfx.github.io/baseline) repository). This code is copied around to other projects as it is, and it's another way of getting stuff out of the main library and the test suite.

* More in the event store section, but let's get the event store functionality into its own library (or possibly a couple other libraries for async projection support).

> 

Reviewer: We should also do a review of our code base and make everything private or internal that we feel shouldn't be the part of Marten public API. Currently, a lot of classes seem to have public modifier without much reason and it's not helping in maintenance.

I'd like to also make the Marten more modular - so eg. detach as much as possible the LINQ, ES, Document Storage, SQL generation into separate as much loosely coupled code parts.

Author: Agreed. I mostly want to slim down the Marten codebase and especially the Marten test suites

Reviewer 2: In regards to going for the access modifiers to reduce the public surface, would it also make sense to address other code hygiene stuff? E.g. we have the namespace `Marten.Exceptions` with two exceptions but then there are also some other exceptions scattered around in different namespaces. And going with exceptions, should we have the standard exceptions ctors (https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/code-quality/ca1032?view=vs-2019)?

I've used NDepend with the Marten codebase from time to time... Could take a look at the most "offending" sites with the default rule set.

Author: I don't tend to give much credence to NDepend's view of "code quality" outside of the standard Cyclomatic Complexity kind of metrics, but we can look at the code organization. I'm dead set against doing any significant amount of work just to make the NDepend layering numbers look better. I wouldn't make the exception constructors a high priority, but it doesn't hurt either way IMO.

Author: @jokokko I have to admit that I'm not enthusiastic about these kinds of static code analysis rules, and I'm specifically dubious of NDepend's ideas of "code quality". I don't have a strong opinion about the exception constructors now that binary serialization and remoting is dead. I think gathering up the exceptions in a common namespace is okay, especially if they're meant for users.

## F# Improvements

> WE NEED TO HAVE AN F# SUBCOMMITTEE TO HELP HERE. 

Reviewer: I was talking with @TheAngryByrd some time ago. He was open for taking the Marten.FSharp. I think that we should start with that. For me making the Marten F# friendly is one of the goals. F# community seems to be aligned with the Marten vision.
We should start from providing support for Discriminated Unions. https://github.com/JasperFx/marten/issues/1283
I was also thinking about using a sample from Domain Modeling Made functional and making sure that we can support the presented approach https://github.com/swlaschin/DomainModelingMadeFunctional

Author: Chet and @wastaz too have all said they'd be happy to help. I think the `IField` revamp makes things like the discriminated unions more feasible

Reviewer 3: cc @baronfel

Reviewer: Maybe we could schedule some call to discuss the initial plan and the biggest pain points?

Reviewer 3: Yes let's set something up for later this week.  Thursday-Sunday EDT I'm good with.

Author: I'm down for that. My workload is suddenly much lower than normal, so I'm game. I can do much earlier in the day with the shelter in place orders.

I'm UTC-5 timewise.

Reviewer: I'm UTC+2. Normally I have meetings between 12-3PM UTC time, but I should be flexible.

Reviewer 4: Im also in UTC+2. Im normally pretty busy during work hours, and I have a tiny ~toddler~ terror that gets put to bed somewhere between 18-19 so Im sadly a little bit less flexible. It would be nice to join, but if we cant figure out a time that works for me Im not gonna be offended if I get left behind. In that case Ill try to communicate my thoughts in writing.

Reviewer 3: @wastaz since you're the most restricted, can you propose some times?

Reviewer 4: Sure, I can try. :)
I think for me the easiest times that I can fit in a meeting (while not having to fight off the child who wants to crash every meeting I have if he's home when I am) would either be trying to fit it in while he's still in preschool or in the evening after he's in bed.

Im feeling bad for suggesting this time given that jeremy is in -5 (but otoh he seems awfully much like a morning person given how often he answers on gitter when Im expecting him to be asleep), but around 12:00 UTC would probably work thu/fri and give me about 1,5h before I have to run off. Otherwise I am pretty sure that I can fit in 18:00 UTC on any of thu-sun.

Reviewer: 12 UTC on Friday works for me. 18 UTC Thu-Fri also.

Reviewer 3: I'm definitely the most flexible and fine with either of those times. Let's try for 12 UTC Friday?

Reviewer 4: You know what guys. Im an idiot. Im really sorry. I completely missed that its international workers day on friday so my kid is not going to preschool, so he's gonna be home and awake and 12UTC is prime time for climbing on dad and jumping around and being everywhere at once.

Reviewer: So maybe 18:00 UTC on Thursday? @jeremydmiller @TheAngryByrd  @wastaz?

Reviewer 3: Unfortunately that's the one time that doesn't work for me here.  I now have work related meetings from 18:00 UTC to 20:00 UTC on Thursday.

Reviewer 5: I'm in the same boat as @TheAngryByrd in terms of meetings/timing.

Reviewer: So Maybe Thursday at 20 UTC or Friday at 20 UTC?

Reviewer 3: Those work for me.

Reviewer 4: Its a bit on the late end for me honestly (my child is a "morning" person, I...am not, but actually going to bed in time in the evenings helps me keep my sanity). But I guess I might be able to be convinced to go for that time, but Ill probably drop off by 21UTCish. Also friday would probably work better than thursday.

Reviewer 3: Ok meet in the gitter and figure out what techi to use, skype/zoom/gotomeeting/etc?

Reviewer: I can set up the hangout link. @jeremydmiller prefers the zoom usually. @jeremydmiller @wastaz @TheAngryByrd are we meeting today or tomorrow? I'd like to know as 20UTC it's also kinda late for me, so I need to know to not fell asleep on the couch 😉

Reviewer 3: I can do either.

Reviewer: @jeremydmiller could you suggest some time suitablle for you? I think that meeting without you won't make much sense ;)

## HostBuilder Integration

> If he's okay with this, I'd vote to bring Joona-Pekka Kokko's ASP.Net Core integration library into the main repository and make that the officially blessed and documented recipe for integrating Marten into .Net Core applications based on the `HostBuilder` in .Net Core. I suppose we could also multi-target `IWebHostBuilder` for ASP.Net Core 2.*.

Reviewer: Yes, we'll need to also add more documentation and samples for that.

Reviewer 2: I'm fine with this.

That `HostBuilder` integration could be extended to:

* Optionally set up the Async Daemon in an `IHostedService` -- more on this in the Event Store section
* Optionally register some kind of `IDocumentSessionBuilder` that could be used to customize session construction? 

> * Have some way to have container resolved `IDocumentSessionListener` objects attached to `IDocumentSession`. This is to have an easy recipe for folks who want events broadcast through messaging infrastructure in CQRS architectures

Reviewer: I can handle that 👍

## Command Line Support

> The `Marten.CommandLine` package already uses Oakton for command line parsing. For easier integration in .Net Core applications, we could shift that to using the [Oakton.AspNetCore](https://jasperfx.github.io/oakton/documentation/aspnetcore/) package so the command line support can be added to any ASP.net Core 2.* or .Net Core 3.* project by installing the Nuget. This might simplify the usage because you'd no longer need a separate project for the command line support.

Reviewer: We could use provide some project templates or snippets.

There are some long standing stories about extending the command line support for the event store projection rebuilding. I think that would be more effective if it switches over to Oakton.AspNetCore.

## Linq

> This is also covered by the [Linq Overhaul](https://github.com/JasperFx/marten/issues/1201) issue.

Reviewer: I agree with the points below. For me, the most important is to have good support for the nested object and collections as that's one of the biggest benefits of using the document database vs ORM.

Author: We'll have to spike this out, but I *think* we could maybe be using common table expressions to help out with queries within collections. Maybe.

Author: *Maybe* the common table expression stuff will help here. I'm curious to try to start using JsonPath with a PLV8 / JS polyfill for < 12 if we have to.

Reviewer: The idea with the polyfill sounds intriguing 👍

* I think we could expand the document metadata to allow for user defined properties like "user id" or "transaction id" much the same way we'll do for the EventStore metadata. We'd need to think about how we extend the document tables and how metadata is attached to a document session

My thought is to designate one (or maybe a few?) .Net type as the "metadata type" for your application like maybe this one:

```
    public class MyMetadata
    {
        public Guid CorrelationId { get; set; }
        public string UserId { get; set; }
    }
```
Maybe that gets added to the `StoreOptions` something like:

```
var store = DocumentStore.For(x => {
    // other stuff

    // This would direct Marten to add extra columns to
    // the documents and events for the metadata properties
    // on the MyMetadata type.

    // This would probably be a fluent interface to optionally fine tune
    // the storage and applicability -- i.e., to all documents, to events, etc.
    x.UseMetadataType<MyMetadata>();
});
```

Then at runtime, you'd do something like:

```

> session.UseMetadata<MyMetadta>(metadata);

Reviewer: Setting up it on the store configuration level is straightforward for me, but why would we like to set it on the session level? If we'd like to go with the elastic configuration then wouldn't it be good to set up it per document type or even document instance?

Author: We'd definitely do it document by document type for built in metadata, but would it really need to vary for things like causation id / user id kind of tracking?

Reviewer: Currently, it's hard to say for me. I think that we dive a bit more on how others are doing that. Some food for thought:
- https://eventstore.com/docs/server/metadata-and-reserved-names/index.html
- https://railseventstore.org/docs/correlation_causation/
My colleague is the Rails Event Store maintainer. I'll try to make some inquiry ;)

Author: Missed this. You'd have to:

1. Do something on `StoreOptions` to declare any kind of custom metadata type so that we can add custom fields on the document or event storage for things like correlation id or causation id.
1. Set the active metadata values at the session level

* Consider replacing the `SelectMany()` implementation with *Common Table Expression* sql statements. That might do a lot to simplify the internal mechanics. Could definitely get us to an n-deep model.

* Do the [Json streaming story](https://github.com/JasperFx/marten/issues/585) because it should be compelling, especially as part of the readside of a CQRS architecture using Marten's event store functionality. 

## Dynamic Code Generation

* Adopt LamarCodeGeneration for building out the dynamic code. The current Expression building is wonky, and it's getting creaky. This will make the document metadata functionality
  easier to build. We can do this either by continuing to build Expressions and compiling to Funcs, or we could re-introduce code compilation via LamarCompiler (which was originally
  built into Marten pre-V1)

**The potential downside is that this doesn't work well at all with `internal` properties, so we'll have to watch that**

## Partial Updates

> Use native postgresql partial JSON updates wherever possible. Let's do a perf test on that first though.

Reviewer: Would be nice to use it also for making projections more performant.

## Event Sourcing

There's an existing conversation on GitHub about the [event sourcing improvements for v4](https://github.com/JasperFx/marten/issues/1307).

### Event Store Metadata

See the earlier conversation about document metadata up above, and also the next section on schema generation for the event store.

What if we allow for custom event wrapper (what's now `IEvent` and `Event<T>`) types, and event stream types? So you could use custom
metadata information right on those types? And possibly even put some logic into event stream creation to capture stream
metadata?

If so, those types could be something like this:

```
    public enum StreamState
    {
        CreateNew,
        Append,

>         AppendOrCreate,

Reviewer: What would be those new stream states mean?

Author: Semantically different operations on processing them. "CreateNew" should fail if the event stream already exists, and that's an existing issue. "Append" fails if it doesn't exist. "AppendOrCreate" just does its thing

Reviewer: I was more wondering how this would impact our api and the internals of processing. But that sounds intriguing.

Author: It's actually not that different than what we do now tbh. Only there would start to be some stricter rules about `AppendEvents` vs `StartStream` and maybe a new `StartOrAppendToStream()`. We've never enforced that StartStream should throw if the stream already exists.

Author: We've already got this open: https://github.com/JasperFx/marten/issues/1388

        Pending,
        History
    }
    
    // This really represents a segment of the underlying stream

>     public abstract class EventStreamBase<TKey, TEvent, TEventBase> where TEvent : IEvent<TEventBase>

Reviewer: How this class would be used?

Author: Internally mostly, but this would represent part of a stream in projection operations. I'm also thinking this would be used to map metadata concerns per stream

Reviewer: Definitely, I'd need some sample to say yay or nay ;)

        // There's a little bit of optimization for inline
        // projections by doing this

        // Other folks want different mechanics
        public StreamState State { get; set; }

        public IList<TEvent> Events { get; } = new List<TEvent>();

        // Data in here while it's being appended, but moves up above when
        // it's pushed into the database
        public IList<TEventBase> Pending { get; } = new List<TEventBase>();
    }

    public interface IEvent<TEventBase>
    {
        Guid Id { get; set; }
        int Version { get; set; }
        long Sequence { get; set; }
        TEventBase Data { get; set; }
        DateTimeOffset Timestamp { get; set; }

        // Additional, user-defined metadata properties
        // like user id or correlation id or whatever

    }

    // This might be too heavyweight
    public interface IMultitenantEvent<TEventBase>: IEvent<TEventBase>
    {
        string TenantId { get; set; }
    }

The custom stream and event types could be used to define segregations between different types of event logs within a single application as part
of the partitioning/sharding/segmenting strategy

> The schema generation would conform to the shape of the base event and stream wrapper much the way that document storage does in the Doc Db features.

Reviewer: I'm fine with the new events, however, our current interface IEvent is not much useful (at least from my experience). Using it in the projections is cumbersome, as you cannot use the same way for aggregation.
In my opinion, it's needed to allow applying the fields from metadata by convention to the event data (eg. Timestamp, Version etc.).
We'd need to also consider how having the Metadata would impact our Append, Aggregation, Projections api.

Author: I'm actually voting to let users define their own `IEvent` this time around for their metadata scheme, and to allow for a bit more variance on identity of the streams.

I did add some notes about the inline projections so you *could* use the `IEvent` or `Event<T>` correctly in v4

Reviewer: Custom IEvent would sound much better for me than the generic class 👍 However the more we could do to reduce the need of using interfaces or base classes the better. That's why I suggested some convention based metadata mapping.

Author: This is going to need more time and thought

### Table/Function Generation and Stream Identity

TODO -- allow more flexibility in the identity of streams, so `int`, `long`, `Guid`, `string` just like the document types. Do more code generation
to accomodate this.

TODO -- there will be more columns & even new tables to track and coordinate the asynchronous projections

### Event Store Partitioning or Sharding

The event sourcing in Marten has limited scalability because of its dependence today upon appending events to 
one table. Closely related to the storage is ways to segment the asynchronous projection support to parallelize
the work across multiple threads or active nodes.

Here are some ideas:

* Allow the user to define multiple event logs in the database. This way you'd have multiple stream/event tables for completely
  different kinds of streams

> * Postgresql native partitioning by tenant id where that's useful

Reviewer: It would be good to add the Stream type column into the events table (might be optional). That would give us much more options of partitioning (eg. by stream type) that might be more effective. Tenant id would be the first partitioning to go, but in my opinion we should allow more flexible definition  (see more in https://severalnines.com/database-blog/how-take-advantage-new-partitioning-features-postgresql-11).
Having stream type in events table we could also provide more effective integration with messaging systems with the outbox pattern (eg. publish to kafka topic per stream type). Currently to do that it's needed to do magic around tenancy which is not elegant and flexible.

Author: I totally agree with that, assuming that you don't go for completely separate EventStream types and segregate it into different tables though. I want any data element that would be used for aggregation to be in the database tables for the same reasons

> * Aggregation keys -- this is tightly coupled to the projections. If there's a projection that is done by something other than tenant id or stream id, try to persist the 

Reviewer: Maybe we could store the offsets of the last processed event per projection? In the end, all events have they unique sequence number so it should be enough to know what the last processed event offset. Kafka is doing such. Of course that's possible to do as long as we're not going outside the database, it might also get complex with tenancy pers chema.

Author: We already track the progress of projections by projection type

  key for however the events/streams are grouped to stream and/or event storage. Thinking about data elements like "Region" or "Country" where you might be doing
  aggregations across streams or tenants. Maybe that's useful?

> * Archive streams that reach some kind of termination event? Move everything to an archive table off to the side? Keeps the event log table cleaner

Reviewer: That can be done also with Postgres partitions (by detaching the partition). For sure we need tombstone events. We may also consider "summary event". The summary event would contain the snapshot of the stream and then could be used to other aggregations to reduce the need of getting all events (eg. event that the accounting year has finished).

Author: I like the summary event idea, especially if we try to do some kind of "map/reduce" builders for the documents. I haven't put much thought into that either way yet.

> * Artificial segmenting of the streams. Use some kind of algorithm that could see stream ids, and assign them to 2 or more "cohorts", then persist that "cohort key" to 

Reviewer: That part I'm not getting ;)

Author: Let's say you have a stream type that you want to aggregate by stream, and it happens to be using `long` for its id type. Then say you only want two segments, "even" and "odd". You could do the per-stream aggregates in two running projection builders, one doing "even" streams and one handling "odd" streams to get more parallelization. That's the kind of artificial segmenting I mean here.

Reviewer: I'm sorry, but I'm still not getting the idea. Maybe some more real world sample/business case would help?

Author: public class QuestPartyTransformer
{
    public QuestParty Create(QuestStarted started)
    {
        // build stuff
     }

     // sync mutation signature
     public void Apply(MonsterSlayed @event, QuestParty aggregate)
     {

     }

     // immutable signature
     public QuestParty Apply(MonsterSlayed @event, QuestParty aggregate)
     {

     }

      // and variable signatures for doing things async and with IoC services
}

Author: I'm looking to create artificial partitioning of streams just to help parallelize more of the async projections. Let's say you're using `int` for stream ids. In that case we could have one active projection builder working with "even numbered stream ids" and another projection builder in parallel working on "odd numbered stream ids"

That make sense?

Reviewer: For this sample how you'd define which event field would be used as the Id to select the document?

About the artificial partitioning, I'm not sure in which case it would help to parallelize the processing (besides the cases in which the event order doesn't matter).

Author: You'd be splitting based on **stream**, not by event. So you'd still be able to process events within a stream by the stream version number.

  both the stream and event data. This would potentially help for the async daemon to parallelize work. It would definitely help out for "live" projections by having 
  smaller tables to work through

### Projections

Thoughts:

Functionality wise, the lifecycle of projections are:

* "Live" projections built on demand from the raw events. This only changes for v4 to take advantage of new snapshotting capabilities
* "Inline" projections built as part of the same unit of work as capturing the source events. See the section on *Inline Projections* because this
  will change internally for v4
* "Async" projections built up in a background process of some sort. I think this turns into a near re-write for v4

By *type*, the projection types *could* be:

* Aggregate document by stream (existing)

> * Aggregate document by tenant id (new)

Reviewer: What's the benefit of having aggregation by tenant id? For me the tenant should be just sharding - so filtering of the events that then will be used in the projections.

Author: Dunno. That's asking around about use cases.

Reviewer: That could help if we treat tennant as a bag for the potential hacking of the features that we don't support yet :)

Author: I could see some reporting done by tenant

> * Execute SQL statement by event type (new) -- so, insert/update/delete. This comes up a lot, and it should be low hanging fruit

Reviewer: Also using patch api?

Author: Yeah, I included that in the transformer idea for document based projections.

* Transform a single event to a document --> needs to become just "carry out some kind of change to a document" and probably ends up sharing more mechanics with the aggregation than it used to
* Aggregate by arbitrary values of either the stream or event types -- but if we do this, I strongly vote to persist whatever the differentiation value is in the database to make projection rebuilds and the async daemon more "parallelizable"

Other thoughts:

> * I want to completely throw away the current `Aggregator` implementations. It was just too naive for real world usage and the internals have gotten ugly

Reviewer: Personally, I'd like to get rid of the different type of projections. Right now each of them has a separate implementation. While all of them so "live" - aggregations, "inline" - snapshots, "viewprojection" - document should be just different with the implemntation details and some optimisations as all of them are just different types of projections.
That was also the idea behind my PR https://github.com/JasperFx/marten/pull/1322. So unify at least on the interface plus the used internally components level the approach.

Author: I don't completely agree here. I don't think it's a big concern to have a unifying interface. Possibly a unified way to *define* the behavior of the projections, then rely a bit on runtime codegen to optimize the behavior

Reviewer: Maybe unifying interface is an oversimplification. I mean more about using the same blocks of code and logic where possible. Current implementation even though they are conceptually similar stuff they have totally separated implementations with different conventions (also from the API perspective).

Also, I'd like to do the event transformations more usable. They're a nice tool for eg. creating an audit log. But their API doesn't allow to use event metadata plus it doesn't have useful helpers as ViewProjection. That seems to be low hanging fruit.

Author: I think we could expand the existing `ViewProjection` and incorporate the transformer class idea in such a way that we could cover every possible type of projection from events to documents.

The projection to flat tables may or may not fit into that.

> * Re-evaluate the `ViewProjection` fluent interface. That might fit in fine to our new model of projections for v4 with more overloads

Reviewer: For me `ViewProjections` even though the API is not ideal was the 90% (or even more) usage of the projections.

Reviewer 4: `ViewProjection` has turned into my "default" projection type as well. The place where it usually breaks down for me is that I occasionally need to project one event to several documents, which it ofc doesnt work for and then I usually have to drop down to the raw `IProjection` interface. 

Im not saying that `ViewProjection` needs to support that use case though. I think its just fine to have a thing that does one thing well.

Reviewer: Fully agreed.

Btw. @wastaz how do you find usage of the `IProjection` interface?

Reviewer 4: `IProjection` is cumbersome to work with tbh. Its nice to have the option, and its gotten a lot better since C# introduced pattern matching. But its not something I _want_ to work with in many cases. Also I still dont really understand how `Apply` vs `ApplyAsync` work. Id have expected them to be like the standard .net XYZ/XYZAsync method pairs but it _seems_ like they are actually part of the inline/async-projection split instead and...its confusing.

Reviewer: Yes, that’s why I’m asking. I didn't want to suggest an answer, but IMHO we should provide something more useful (or simpler) for the users. 
This interface is similar to the Event Store subscription, so it should still be an option, but would be nice to provide an easier option (eg. with Event instead of the whole Event Page).

Author: @wastaz @oskardudycz I'd like to see if we could unify the projection definition through some mix of an improved `ViewProjection` and my *Transformer* idea and remove the `IProjection` interface altogether. 

And yeah, there's some mixed concerns with `IProjection` between things that only matter for inline projections and some things that only matter for async.

* I've been in favor of having adapters for existing projection libraries like [Liquid Projections](https://liquidprojections.net/) in the past, but I think we'd be losing too
  much optization, especially for the aggregations inside the async daemon.

#### Defining a Projection to a Document

```

> ProjectTo<ProjectedDocument>()

Reviewer: I'm not sure how our users are using that, but I've never used this fluent syntax in my previous project. I always created dedicated ViewProjection class. It was for me much easier to maintain.

Author: Using object scoping instead? I'm cool with that.

Reviewer 4: I agree with @oskardudycz. The fluent syntax looks nice but projection logic is rarely so "small" that it feels like it fits well in this place. Id rather have it in a separate class. Also, with some improvements to the design of the projection classes that would also make it easier to unit test projections (which sadly is a bit too messy today).

Reviewer: Yup, unit testing is a valid case. I also heard from few people that "Marten is not easily unit testable". However, I don't fully agree with the statement, but projections for sure should be possible to be tested without Marten infrastructure.

Author: "Marten is not easily unit testable". -- because folks shoot themselves in the foot by trying to mock out the Linq support. I still need to do some testing recommendations. 

And I think your code is structured poorly if you think you need to mock Marten to test your business functionality.

Reviewer: @jeremydmiller I fully agree for that point. But still, it'd be good to verify for the projection if it's mapping the fields properly without the need to call DB.

    // How to transform the events to the projected document, see below
    .TransformWith<SampleTransformer>()

    // Optionally aggregate by stream
    .AggregateByStream() // Think this is self-descriptive

    .AggregateByTenant() // Not sure how common this would be. Aggregate across the entire tenant

    // Or aggregate by something special, hopefull use a common base type here for the event type

>     .AggregateByEventData<TEvent>(Expression<Func<TEvent, int>> expression) // what's the identity of the projected, aggregate doc?

Reviewer: Would be nice to see the example usage.

Author: This would be doing some kind of aggregation across streams, like maybe
`.AggregateByEventData<NewResident>(x => x.PostalCode)`

Reviewer: That sounds interesting but I'm not sure if the current ViewProjections api and selecting the projection id from the event is more straightforward. It would be nice to gather some feedback from our Event Store users about the preferences.

Reviewer 4: I use `ViewProjection` a lot for projecting to different ids than the stream id. Honestly the most common usage of projections for me is wanting to project to a different id than the stream id. Not entirely sure which "is the best" here though tbh.

Reviewer: Saw here. For the same stream, normally inline projections were enough in most of the cases.

Author: @wastaz Would that be as important if you had more ability to vary the stream identity? I was mostly thinking about aggregates across streams here.

Author: We could make it a lower priority item, but it's surely gonna come up sooner or later. Or maybe it's something you handle more easily through being able to project to flat tables, and let standard SQL do its thing

Reviewer: I agree.

    .DeleteOn<TEvent>() // the aggregate document should be deleted if an event of this type hits
                        // In this case, we could look ahead and "know" in the rebuilds not to rebuild
                        // a projection for this aggregate as an optimization

>     .SnapshotInIncrementsOf(10) // Then maybe there are other options to retain old snapshots or not? Dunno

Reviewer: I think that we should support much more flexible options for snapshots. Once per number of events might be in theory useful for performance, but I'm not sure if it'll be used as it's hard to predict the corellation to the business actions (so if it should be snapshoted or not). The more functional would be imho snapshot on exact event type. See eg. https://verraes.net/2019/05/patterns-for-decoupling-distsys-passage-of-time-event/

    
```

Now that folks are used to the convention based signature approach of `StartUp` in ASP.Net Core, I suggest doing something
similar for the projections like so:

```
    // This purposely does not implement any kind of interface
    // Defines how to apply changes to one kind of projected document

>     public class SampleTransformer

Reviewer: It would be good to see the example usage. I'm not sure if I get the idea behind that class.

Author: It's mostly to not have to have a bazillion overloads on the fluent interface to define projection steps. I'm not actually a fan of `ViewProjection` or anything that makes you code by inline Lambdas. Gives you more flexibility to use sync/async signatures, to use more services from the underlying container, to switch between the raw event, event wrappers, and stream information.

Reviewer: Ok, that seems legit.

        public int AggregateBy(EventWrapper @event);

        // Sync version with raw event
        public void Apply(Event1 @event, ProjectedDocument doc);

        // Sync version with event wrapper, could be a custom implementation of IEvent
        // to get at event metadata & stream metadata or partitioning information
        public void Apply(EventWrapper<Event1> @event, MyEventStream stream, ProjectedDocument doc);

        // Sync version w/ immutable projected docs
        public ProjectedDocument Apply(Event1 @event, ProjectedDocument doc);

        // apply a partial update to an aggregate document, but this wouldn't
        // get used if there's some reason to fetch the whole aggregate for a segment
        // of events. 
        public void Partial(Event1, @event, IDocumentSession session);

        // Should the aggregate document be deleted based on some event data?
        public bool ShouldBeDeleted(Event1 @event);
        public bool ShouldBeDeleted(EventWrapper @event);
        public bool ShouldBeDeleted(EventWrapper @event, MyEventStream stream);
    }
```

#### Defining a Projection to a SQL Statement(s)

TODO

#### Inline Projections

> There's been some complaints and obvious confusion about the `IEvent` interface and how the metadata properties like

Reviewer: I think that it's not only in the inline but in general (as far as I understood).

Author: Correct. Only a problem for the inline projections, but we might as well close that down. I think it dovetails nicely with the tombstone idea

In v4, the inline projection support and the `UpdateBatch` mechanics should be smart enough to "know" when the transformation
or aggregation requires metadata, so that:

#### If no event or stream metadata is necessary...

It works basically as it does today. Upon `IDocumentSession.SaveChanges() / SaveChangesAsync()`:

1. The inline projections work across the incoming event objects, create new projected documents
or update existing documents as necessary just prior to sending the current `UnitOfWork` to the database
1. The `DocumentSession` issues the batched up commands with both the event capture and the projection documents
1. The underlying database transaction is committed

If there's no need for event metadata, do thing in fewer network round trips

#### If event or stream metadata is necessary...

This gets a little more complicated, because the projections can't be calculated until *after* the events are appended, so:

1. The events get appended, and the sproc returns an array of the new event versions
1. Build up an array of `IEvent` wrappers that have the stream and event metadata

> 1. Pass the `IEvent` wrappers into the transformation code, and get an additional `UpdateBatch` of projected document inserts

Reviewer: As I wrote in the previous comment. It would be good if we make the convention mapping of the metadata to the event so we would not force users to implement `IEvent` as in my opinion it's making things much more complicated and less intuitive.

Author: You'd only need a custom `IEvent` type if you wanted custom metadata. I'm not super thrilled about having to have a Dictionary for metadata. I could be convinced I suppose.

Reviewer: I'm also not in favour of Dictionary. Maybe we could come up with some convention mapping (so eg. if event has field Timestamp then it might inherit the Timestamp from the metadata).

   and updates
1. Submit the subsequent `UpdateBatch` to the database
1. The underlying database transaction is committed

The difference here is that this will take multiple batched commands to the database within the same `NpgsqlTransaction`

### Snapshots & "Live" Projections

## Async Daemon

For v4, the Async Daemon needs to come in a couple different possible deployment configurations:

1. "Classic" database polling mode -- no queueing, just something that polls for new events and runs the projections. I think this will be a near rewrite in v4, but there's some 
   existing art in [Jasper's DurabilityAgent](http://jasperfx.github.io/documentation/durability/) that might help this along
1. Messaging-based Mode -- use Rabbit MQ, Azure Service Bus, Kafka, etc. to gather up events and connect with the running projections

> ### Rebuilding Projections

Reviewer: We need to finish the event sourcing tenancy rebuild (currently it's not working).

Author: See what I was trying to say about having the projections decoupled from `IDocumentSession`. By going straight at creating `IStorageOperation` objects, I think it would make it much, much easier to deal with multi-tenancy. I think `DocumentSession` was just getting in the way here

Reviewer: I'm not sure if that's needed in the first implementation, but eventually for sure it should be as you said.

This gets a little more complicated, because the projections can't be calculated until *after* the events are appended, so:

1. The events get appended, and the sproc returns an array of the new event versions
1. Build up an array of `IEvent` wrappers that have the stream and event metadata
1. Pass the `IEvent` wrappers into the transformation code, and get an additional `UpdateBatch` of projected document inserts
   and updates
1. Submit the subsequent `UpdateBatch` to the database
1. The underlying database transaction is committed

The difference here is that this will take multiple batched commands to the database within the same `NpgsqlTransaction`

### Snapshots & "Live" Projections

TODO

## Async Daemon

For v4, the Async Daemon needs to come in a couple different possible deployment configurations:

1. "Classic" Polling-Based Mode -- no queueing, just something like the existing Async Daemon that polls for new events and runs the projections. I think this will be a near rewrite in v4, but there's some 
   existing art in [Jasper's DurabilityAgent](http://jasperfx.github.io/documentation/durability/) that might help this along

> 1. Messaging-Based Mode -- use Rabbit MQ, Azure Service Bus, Kafka, etc. to gather up events and connect with the running projections

Reviewer: For the imports from the message buses, we'd need to also allow to set up own version (currently it's always incremented) or allow aggregation based on the other order (so eg. version stored in the event data). This is critical as lot of the messaging systems does not easily provide a guarantee of ordering. If they do then compromising performance, so not all peopleare turning on.
We could also think about some built-in idempotency handling, eg. optional rejection based on correlation id (so it's rejecting second event of the same type with the same correlation id).

Reviewer 4: Honestly if involving a message bus then you should count on things arriving out of order and occasionally being duplicated. Id say that you should never build anything for a message bus expecting to not solve those issues. A lot of buses dont even have options to turn on guaranteed ordering or deduplication and those that do...yea, you dont want to turn it on.

Reviewer: @wastaz this is exactly what I meant 👍

For both modes, we've got these issues to solve:

1. Assigning projection ownership between active nodes, including the distribution and segmentation of projection builders
1. Triggering a projection rebuild? Or at least a switchover?
1. Enforcing event ordering

> Some general thoughts:

Reviewer: I like that general concept 👍

> * Try to decouple the projections away from `IDocumentSession` as a way to make the projection code more efficient

Reviewer: That would also help with unit testing that @wastaz mentioned.

* By skipping the document session, we could go directly at individual `IStorageOperation` for updates maybe. Allowing us to more effectively parallelize the generation of 
  document updates
* Generate a new Postgresql function for projected documents that combines the progress tracking by projection, adds optimistic concurrency checks,
  and upserts an array of documents. Postgresql support for arrays makes this feasible
* We need to support zero downtime projection rebuilds
* For aggregations, introduce some caching on the aggregated documents as an optimization. Depending on the aggregation, this might not be super effective,
  but would be huge for rebuilding projections

> 

Reviewer: I think that we should also think and deliver a concept of the pluggable chain of Upcasters and Downcasters (so as decorators for aggregation/projection). Currently to achieve that it's possible only via the JSON.NET magic. It would be not only useful to easier maintain the event versioning (so transforming event from the V2 version to V3). 
It could be also used for event encryption (eg. for GDPR).

Most of the Event Stores provide such functionality out of the box.

See also: https://github.com/JasperFx/marten/issues/1377.

Reviewer 2: @oskardudycz In regards to encryption, I'm thinking if [pgcrypto](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/pgcrypto.html) could be utilized. So it would be somewhat transparently usable through Marten. Though it maybe should be raised as a separate talking point altogether.

For the other points, the zero downtime projection rebuilds to me feel like a huge usability improvement and a good selling point. Would reduce or even eliminate some dance with upgrades & maintenance.

Reviewer: Using pgcrypto seems to be interesting idea. We can investigate that to have built in encryption mechanism.
However, having the decorators for the other cases is still a must have in my opinion.

### Polling-Based Mode

Just some thoughts:

> * Use [advisory locks](https://hashrocket.com/blog/posts/advisory-locks-in-postgres) for [leader election](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leader_election) of the async daemon. The question becomes though, do you try to do a coarse grained "active / ready standby" split where the entire async deamon runs on one node at a time, or do you try to get more fine-grained and try to spread

Reviewer: I need to become more familiar with advisory locks to give any comments about that.

Reviewer 4: Just gonna chime in here and say that advisory locks are amazing.

different projections or segments of projections around to different nodes?

* Inactive nodes will poll to try to take over the ownership of the active daemon

> ### Messaging-Based Projections

Reviewer: **General concern for that point:** Do we want to make Marten distributed database/event store? I'm not against that, I'm just afraid that effectively we don't have now enough capacity to do it solid, production-ready solution. I think that we'd need to get more work around sustainability to be able to work not only after hours. I'm all for that idea, but I think that we need to solve the financial puzzle to be able to put more focus on that...

I think that the first thing that would be good to provide would be just a subscription mechanism similar to what Event Store has (see https://eventstore.com/docs/getting-started/reading-subscribing-events/index.html?tabs=tabid-6%2Ctabid-dotnet-client%2Ctabid-dotnet-read-event%2Ctabid-create-sub-dotnet ). For the basic mechanism, it would probably even tuned async daemon would be fine. Of course, the user would need to manage it on their own with the hosted service mechanism, but it still seems to be an achievable first step.

Author: I mean for us to make the polling async daemon able to run in a cluster, even if that's just by running hot on one node, and cold on others.

# Marten v4 Ideas

## Pulling it Off

We've got the typical problems of needing to address incoming pull requests and bug issues in master while probably needing to have a long lived branch for *v4*. 

> As an initial plan, let's:

Reviewer: I'm fine with the initial plan 👍

1. Do the Event Store v4 work in a separate project built as an add on from the very beginning, but leave the existing event store in place. That would enable us to do a lot of work *and* mostly be able to keep that work in master so we don't have long-lived branch problems. Break open the event store improvement work because that's where most of the interest is for this release.

## Miscellaneous Ideas

* Look at some kind of object pooling for the `DocumentSession` / `QuerySession` objects?
* Ditch the document by document type schema configuration where Document *A* can be in one schema, and Document "B" is in another schema. Do that, and I think we open the door for multi-tenancy by schema. 
* ~~Eliminate `ManagedConnection` altogether. I think it results in unnecessary object allocations and it's causing more harm that help as it's been extended over time.~~ **After studying that more today, it's just too damn embedded. At least try to kill off the `Execute` methods that take in a Lambda**. See [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/JasperFx/marten/issues/1469).

> * ~~Can we consider ditching < .Net Core or .Net v5 for v4?~~ **The probable answer is "no," so let's just take this off the table.**

Reviewer: Yes, I think that knowing the last releases of Microsoft is risky to assume that it will just work and all people will move to v5 immediately.

My thought is to designate one (or maybe a few?) .Net type as the "metadata type" for your application like maybe this one:

```
    public class MyMetadata
    {
        public Guid CorrelationId { get; set; }
        public string UserId { get; set; }
    }
```
Maybe that gets added to the `StoreOptions` something like:

```
var store = DocumentStore.For(x => {
    // other stuff

    // This would direct Marten to add extra columns to
    // the documents and events for the metadata properties
    // on the MyMetadata type.

    // This would probably be a fluent interface to optionally fine tune
    // the storage and applicability -- i.e., to all documents, to events, etc.
    x.UseMetadataType<MyMetadata>();
});
```

Then at runtime, you'd do something like:

```
session.UseMetadata<MyMetadta>(metadata);
```

Either through docs or through the new, official .Net Core integration, we have patterns to have that automatically set upon
new `DocumentSession` objects being created from the IoC to make the tracking be seemless.

> ## Extract Generic Database Helpers to its own Library

Reviewer: Fully agree 👍

* Pull the ADO.Net helper code like `CommandBuilder` and the extension methods into a small helper library somewhere else (I'm nominating the [Baseline](https://jasperfx.github.io/baseline) repository). This code is copied around to other projects as it is, and it's another way of getting stuff out of the main library and the test suite.

Track this work in [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/JasperFx/marten/issues/1467).

## F# Improvements

We'll have a virtual F# subcommittee to be watching this work for F#-friendliness:

* [Fred](https://github.com/wastaz)
* [Chet Husk](https://twitter.com/ChetHusk)
* [Jimmy Byrd](https://github.com/TheAngryByrd)

## HostBuilder Integration

> We'll bring Joona-Pekka Kokko's [ASP.Net Core integration library](https://github.com/jokokko/marten.aspnetcore) into the main repository and make that the officially blessed and documented recipe for integrating Marten into .Net Core applications based on the `HostBuilder` in .Net Core. I suppose we could also multi-target `IWebHostBuilder` for ASP.Net Core 2.*.

Reviewer: I think that we should be good with supporting only 3.1 and .NET 5. 3.1 is LTS, all below (also 2.2) are not officially supported.

> We'll bring Joona-Pekka Kokko's [ASP.Net Core integration library](https://github.com/jokokko/marten.aspnetcore) into the main repository and make that the officially blessed and documented recipe for integrating Marten into .Net Core applications based on the `HostBuilder` in .Net Core. I suppose we could also multi-target `IWebHostBuilder` for ASP.Net Core 2.*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll bring Joona-Pekka Kokko's [ASP.Net Core integration library](https://github.com/jokokko/marten.aspnetcore) into the main repository and make that the officially blessed and documented recipe for integrating Marten into .Net Core applications based on the `HostBuilder` in .Net Core. I suppose we could also multi-target `IWebHostBuilder` for ASP.Net Core 3.x.
```

#### If event or stream metadata is necessary...

This gets a little more complicated, because the projections can't be calculated until *after* the events are appended, so:

1. The events get appended, and the sproc returns an array of the new event versions
1. Build up an array of `IEvent` wrappers that have the stream and event metadata
1. Pass the `IEvent` wrappers into the transformation code, and get an additional `UpdateBatch` of projected document inserts
   and updates
1. Submit the subsequent `UpdateBatch` to the database
1. The underlying database transaction is committed

The difference here is that this will take multiple batched commands to the database within the same `NpgsqlTransaction`

### Snapshots & "Live" Projections

## Async Daemon

For v4, the Async Daemon needs to come in a couple different possible deployment configurations:

1. "Classic" database polling mode -- no queueing, just something that polls for new events and runs the projections. I think this will be a near rewrite in v4, but there's some 
   existing art in [Jasper's DurabilityAgent](http://jasperfx.github.io/documentation/durability/) that might help this along

> 1. Messaging-based Mode -- use Rabbit MQ, Azure Service Bus, Kafka, etc. to gather up events and connect with the running projections

Reviewer 4: This is...I mean, I would love to have this. Dont get me wrong. But there are several things to take into account here. Ill come back to this later when Im done iwth my writeup.
